Come back in the previous video we talked about a special characteristic or properties of binary trees.
And because of the way binary trees are structured there is a certain way for us to calculate the number
of notes that they have for example on Level 0 of a binary tree.
That is the very top level where we only have one root node we can calculate how many note there are
by doing two to the power of the level which is zero.
So if I do two to the power of zero it's going to equal one.
That is we have one note.
If we go our level down and say what about Level 1 how many levels do we have.
Well we have two to the power of one which equals two.
All right let's keep going.
What about level 2.
How many nodes in total do we have on that level.
Well we have two to the power of two which is equal to four.
And then one last level of say Level Three.
How many nodes are we going to have in level three in a perfectly balanced binary tree.
Well two to the power of three is going to equal eight Oh boy.
We just do some math here and I promised that this course is going to be the mathy.
But bear with me here.
I want to explain to you what old log and means.
Knowing what we just did now and knowing that these are the total number of nodes if we imagine that
this data was in an array that means that we have eight places that we need to iterate through eight
nodes that we need to check perhaps to search for something well based on this formula here that means
that we can't find out the number of nodes in a tree by doing two to the power of H or the height that
is the level if we know how many levels are binary tree is we can find out how many total nodes there
are two to the power of H minus one.
Now why this minus one.
Well if we go back to our diagram this binary tree we have one two three four five six seven.
We have seven total nodes and the tree is one to three.
The height of the tree while it's three levels deep.
So two to the power of three minus one is seven nodes.
Now if we actually simplify this we can just simply say that the log of nodes is going to equal the
height or the steps.
And I use log here just think your wandering log simply means that log 100 is equal to two because 10
to the power of two equals 100.
So all I did was using this I simplified and said that log notes is equal to the height and we've dropped
negative one here because it's in significant but log nodes is the number of steps or height.
And let's change just two steps that we would use in a treat.
Let me show you again in our diagram log and simply means that based on the height the maximum number
of decisions.
Let's say we're looking for a specific node that we're going to take is going to be log.
And that means is this the node we're looking for.
No.
Then we either go left or right unless we go left and say Is this the no that we're looking for.
And that's our second step.
If the answer is No.
Them either go left or right and we say is this a no we're looking for.
Yes.
So we have maximum three steps year instead of if you want one two three four five six seven steps.
You see that there's some sort of efficiency here.
And coming up we're going to learn about binary search trees where we're able to minimize those steps
instead of visiting every single note.
So when you see the notation of oh Lague and don't get started all that saying is that the choice of
the next element on which to perform some sort of action is one of several possibilities and only one
needs to be chosen.
We don't have to check both in a good way to think about log and is when you're looking through a phone
book.
You don't actually check every single person in a phonebook do you.
Instead you can simply do what's called divide and conquer by looking based on where their names alphabetically
begin.
You would open up the book to where you think the letter will start with the name will start with and
then keep dividing and conquering until you get to that person.
You only need to explore a subset of each section before you eventually find someone's phone number.
So just think of that.
Oh Lagann is just like looking through a phone book.
And the reason that I just talked about all Lagann in such detail is because it's an important concept.
It's really really fast as you can see here again is this like green good area.
That's even better than oh then linear time because we don't need to check every single element.
And in the next video we're going to talk about the most common tree that you're going to see in a lot
of places called binary search tree.
And as the name suggests it allows us to search really efficiently and just by looking at this graph
you might be able to think about how a place like Google and Google search might find this extremely
useful.
Right.
When we search through Google they have a ton of Web sites a ton of nodes to search through.
How are they able to give us an answer to our searches so fast if they used all of Van time complexity
it's going to take a lot of time and it's going to be really expensive for them.
So instead they use a tree structure or tree data structure so that our searches can be a lot faster
with something like oh log in I'll see in the next video.